# Voice Registry System Meeting Minutes
This document is meant to capture the meeting notes and decision.


## Meeting 09.03.2020

<details><summary>click for meeting details...</summary>

**Attendance:** @maridob, @omitfo2, @rogerkibbe, @rmtuckerphx, @nkmyers0794

### Agenda:
  - Vote for the VRS moderator
  - Discuss the problem statement([#56](https://github.com/open-voice-network/docs/issues/56), [#57](https://github.com/open-voice-network/docs/issues/57), [#58](https://github.com/open-voice-network/docs/issues/58), ) submitted from the last meeting. 

### Discussion/Decision Points:
  - @maridob is voted for VRS moderator
  - Everyone agreed that we should be using the speaking language. See terminology alignment in the [VRS doc](https://github.com/open-voice-network/docs/blob/master/components/voice_registry_system.m)
  - Reviewed the above issues and rephrased based on the agreed terminology alignment. All notes for the individual issue are captured in the github | issue. 
  - Create an issue to add *technical resource* in the terminology alignment. 
    > Technical resource can be a publisher/developer. It can be a representative of an entity or independent party. Their role is to create an actual listing of the voice application.
  - Create an issue to add *voice application* in the terminology alignment. This is similar definition in the the [technical masterplan document](https://github.com/open-voice-network/docs/blob/master/technical_masterplan.md).

### Action Item(s):
  - Create an issue to add the *technical resource* terminology - Maria
  - Create an issue to add the *voice application* terminology - Maria

### Next Steps:
  - Solidify the problem statement.
  - Prioritize the importance of problem based on business value and impact.

</details>

## Meeting 09.17.2020

<details><summary>click for meeting details...</summary>

### Agenda:
  - Action items are addressed from the previous meeting.
  - Solidify and prioritize the problem statement. In each problem, we need to assess the following:
      <br>(1) What is the problem?
      <br>(2) Who is affected?
      <br>(3) Where does it happen?
      <br>(3) Why is this problem important? What value does it bring?
  - Prioritize the importance of problem-based on business value and impact.

### Discussion/Decision Points:
- Discussed the difference between VII vs. OVN in general.
- Identified six problems that VRS can tackle. See git issues. 
- Problem 5 is an analogy of a Yellowpages. Any persona such as user, publisher, or technical resources can go to VRS as a central location to find voice application or invocation available. 
-  Marteen mentioned the Conversational Platform should be defined as an assistant. We will discuss this in the next meeting.

### Action Item:
  - Prioritize the importance of problem-based on business value and impact.

### Next Steps:
  - Create a poll, and people can vote on the problem prioritization.


</details>
